#+TITLE: Personalization: The Commoditization of Information Warfare
#+REVEAL_ROOT: file:///home/rebecca/projects/reveal.js
#+REVEAL_THEME: league
#+REVEAL_TITLE_SLIDE: <h3>%t</h3>
#+OPTIONS: num:nil
#+OPTIONS: toc:nil

* Boilerplate

** Disclaimers
#+ATTR_REVEAL: :frag (fade-in fade-in fade-in) :frag_idx (1 2 3)
- All views are my own and don't represent the views of my employer
- https://github.com/rebeccaskinner/presentations
- License [[https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/][CC BY-SA 4.0]]

** About Me
#+ATTR_REVEAL: :frag (fade-in fade-in fade-in) :frag_idx (1 2 3)
- Twitter: [[https://twitter.com/cercerilla/][@cercerilla]]
- Github: https://github.com/rebeccaskinner

* Ad-Tech Is An Existential Threat To Modern Civilization

The modern ad-tech ecosystem and infrastructure constitutes perhaps
the single largest existential threat to civilization of any
technology in the modern world.

** Content Warning
This talk will address some sensitive topics, including social,
political, and physical violence. Although I have tried to keep
discussions of these topics general, anyone who feels like they need
to limit exposure to these triggers may step away for the first
section of the talk.


* Real-world impacts of ubiquitous surveillance

[[./cameras.jpg]]

** The things we think of

There are some common things that we discuss in the context of ad-tech

*** Annoying Ads

The most common problem when we thing of ad-tech and ubiquitious
surveillance is annoying ads.  How many times have you bought a new
sofa and been inundated with ads for sofas?

*** Media Fatigue

Impression driven revenue models, like advertising in social media,
are incentivized to drive increased engagement.  This can lead people
to be depressed or anxious as they are pulled deeper into media
cycles.

*** Online Harassment and Stalking

Data collected by advertisers can be compromised and used by harassers
and stalkers.

*** Attack Vectors

Ad-tech networks can be useful attack vectors for distributing
malware, cryptominers, and trackers.  As you'll see later in this
talk, many of these attacks are viable even for networks that disallow
javascript or otherwise attempt to sanitize payloads.

** The things we choose not to

[[./nazis.jpg]]

*** Gamergate and Neo-Nazi Recruitment

[[./milo.png]]

*** Gamergate and Neo-Nazi Recruitment

Groups can make use of personalization and engagement systems to drive
radicalization.  A number of facist and white nationalist groups are
actively exploiting algorithms on sites like YouTube to drive
radicalization.

*** Political Interference

[[./brexit.jpg]]

*** Political Interference

Although advertising and propaganda have been a mainstay of politics
forever, recent trends toward using hyper-personalization in political
ads has changed the landscape.

*** Mass Shootings

Engagement loops and radicalization may be factors that drive mass
shootings.

*** Dissident Crackdowns

[[./umbrella.jpg]]

*** Dissident Crackdowns

Many governments have leveraged ad-tech as a means of information
gathering as part of dissident crackdowns.  The ability to easily
profile someone based on their online activity and social connections,
and target them based on location, make the information economy a
natural ally of authoritarian governments.

*** Genocide
[[./ice.jpg]]

*** Genocide

Groups like ICE are able to make use of clique identification,
location tracking and targeting to identify and target individuals and
groups for capture.

* How do these factor into professional ethics for people working in Data Science?

** Considering Externalities Of Our Systems

The harm that the information economy does is often indirect.  We need
to consider indirect effects when building systems.

** Considering The Scale of Impact

Scale matters.  While we would prefer to avoid all individual harm,
it's important to realize that the scale of impact has grown to the
point where it can cause massive social and political changes with
long-term and broad-reaching consequences.

** Moral Culpability of Secondary and Tertiary Effects

Understanding the depth and scope of the problem, we must put some
degree of moral culpability on the builders of these systems for their
secondary and tertiary effects.

* What is Information Warfare?

[[./spy.jpg]]

** Information Warfare Is About People

Much of information warfare comes down to people- extracting
information from them, or using (real or false) information to
influence them.  The information economy has commoditized both.

*** Mass Communication

Mass communication, usually in the form of propaganda, is an important
part of information warfare.  Mass communication allows a message to
be widely distributed among a population in order to affect group
behavior.

*** Targeting Groups and Individuals

In addition to untargetted mass communication, information warfare
often involves targeting individuals or specific groups.  This allows
messages to be tailored to individuals and groups, and groups to be
influenced in more fine-grained ways.

*** Collecting and Exploiting Knowledge

Effective information warfare requires that knowledge be collected and
exploited.  This can take several different forms, and we'll look at
several of them throughout this talk.

** These Aren't New Techniques

*** The Long History of Propaganda

[[./triumph.png]]

*** Spycraft During The Cold War (And Before)

Spycraft has existed for all of human history, but the cold war saw an
explosion in the awareness of spycraft in the modern consciousness.
These techniques, have continued to grow and be refined.

*** McCarthyism And Social Networks As Tools of Persecution

[[./mccarthy.jpg]]

* The Information Economy

[[./adtech.png]]

** Surveillance Capitalism

Surveillance capitalism is a broad term that refers to the
commodification of personal information.  The information economy is
the market on which surveillance capitalism runs.

*** The Ad-Tech Ecosystem

The ad-tech ecosystem is the core of the information economy.  Supply
and demand side providers, data management platforms, content delivery
networks, and more all work together to monetize personal information
through the placement of personalized ads.

*** Engagement as an Investment Metric

Platform engagement is a key metric that drives investor dolloars.
This incentivizes companies to design their products to maximize the
amount of time people spend with their product, and to increase the
number of ways people interact with it.

*** Engagement and Retention Services

With engagement as a key metric for raising money, services have
sprung up to offer expertise in helping companies optimize engagement.
These services are able to leverage knowledge and data from multiple
platforms to develop better approaches toward targeting content at
users to maximize the ways that they engage.

*** Consumer Demand for Personalization

Consumers often demand personalization, and will voluntarily provide
large amounts of data to assist companies in better refining
personalization algorithms.

* Mass Personalization And The Power of Scale

[[./youtube.png]]

** A Difference In Scale As A Difference In Kind

Although most of the techniques that are being applied in ad-tech have
been used before, the change in scale is substantial.  Before modern
ad-tech, even automated surveillance required specific targeting of
individuals.  Mass propaganda had slow iteration times as campaigns
had to be developed, deployed, and tested against populations.

** Rapid Iteration on Propaganda and Mass Communication

As automated systems allow mass deployment of systems that allow
models to be tested and refined based on data from very large
populations.  This has turned the work of dozens or hundreds of
analysts into something that can be done by a few developers at a
startup in a week.

** Mass Individualization Through Targeting Algorithms

Before the advent of modern ad-tech, the choice was often between
targeting a small group of individuals, or creating more general
campaigns against a larger population.  It was not possible to target
billions of people individually.  Technology has enabled us to apply
individually tailored actions against people en-mass, optimizing the
effects of a campaign on a person-by-person basis.

** Data Collection

Data collection technologies have been substantially improved through
the use of ad-tech.  Even considering a hypothetical system that was
able to collect all telecommunications data for every individual,
before the use of ad-tech data collection was limited due to the lack
of technologies to drive engagement and solicit data that might not
otherwise have ever been transmitted.

* How The Information Marketplace is Exploitable

** Types Of Information Markets

*** Aggregate Market Information

[[./aggregate_data.png]]

*** Aggregate Market Information

Aggregate information markets sell information about specific
populations in aggregate.  This data is difficult to directly
de-anonymize, but can provide useful information to help de-anonymize
data from other sources.

*** Anonymized Market Information

[[./anon_data.png]]

*** Anonymized Market Information

Anonymized markets sell information that has been somehow masked.
Sometimes this involves removing specific personally identifiable
information, like a name or email address.  Othertimes, this may
involve using techniques like differential privacy to mask the data
being sold.

*** Content Targeting

[[./buy_ad.png]]

*** Content Targeting

Content targeting is one of the most popular parts of the information
market because companies can use their data collection practices as a
competitive advantage, and advertise that they do not share data.
Instead, they allow buyers to send data to users matching any number
of specific criteria, indirectly selling data.

*** Data Brokers

Data brokers directly sell user data.  Frequently data brokers focus
on enriching data with specific pieces of additional information.

** Attacking The Information Market

*** The Information Market is A Market

The information market is a market.  There are few controls, and most
of the time data or content placement goes to the highest bidder.

*** There Are Many Players

Because of the number of players in the information market, it is
trivial for a determined group to collect data from many different
providers without being obvious about their end goal.

** Injective Exploitation

Injective exploitation is the process of using ad-tech networks and
recommendation systems as they are intended.  This process involves
placing content into the system and using targeting systems to drive
your targets to the content.

** Information Exfiltration

Exfiltration is the process of extracting data out of a system.
Exfiltration is different than buying data directly.

*** Tunneling Information Out Of Targeted Ads

There are an enormous number of ways to extract information from users
through targeted ads.  Even in systems designed to protect users from
information capture, there are extremely effective ways of gathering
personal information.

*** Refinement Attacks With Multiple Sources

[[./venn.gif]]

*** Refinement Attacks With Multiple Sources

Targeting itself is a valuable way of gathering information.  Thanks
to fingerprinting, it's possible to identify a specific user that has
received an ad.  Because ads can be targeted across different
characteristics it's possible to refine an understanding of what
characteristics a user matched on.

** Side-Channel Attacks

Side-channel attacks use the side-effects of a request to collect or
exfiltrate data.

** Data Enrichment

*** De-Anonymization

*** Cross-Domain Data Collection

*** Combining Data from Multiple Data Vendors

* Information Marketplace ⨯ Social Engineering

** Engagement Funnels

Engagement funnels use layers of content that are specifically
designed to drive a wide set of users down a path toward specific
content.

** Clique Identification

[[./clique.png]]

** Clique Identification

Clique identification is the process of identifying related sets of
users.  This can be a useful technique to access data about users who
might not engage on certain platforms, or who go to lengths to protect
their data.

* Information Marketplace ⨯ Technical Exploitation

** Direct Exploitation

In many cases ad platforms allow code to be directly injected into
apps or websites.  This code can use exploits to access users systems
and devices.

** Fingerprinting

Fingerprinting is the process of injecting markers in a users system
to allow subsequent applications to better identify the user.
Fingerprinting is typically thought of in terms of bits of information
that can be encoded through different systems.  There are hundreds of
ways to fingerprint users.  We'll look at a couple of them:

*** Web Fonts

The specific set of fonts on a user's system can be used to identify
them.  It's also possible to programatically generate web fonts and
use them in content to uniquely identify a specific device.

*** Accelerometer Drift

Devices with accelerometers can be uniquely identified by drift caused
by minor hardware deficiencies.  It is possible to recover this even
from devices that reduce the accuracy of data, or partially randomize
it, to mask drift.

*** GPU Fingerprinting

Uninitialized rendering canvases can contain biases that allow
fingerprinting of GPU hardware.

** Data Exfiltration

*** Request Exfiltration

Data can be encoded in requests that are sent out of a system.  Even
when security policy prevents content from being loaded, data can be
encoded into subdomains in a DNS requests, the timing between
requests, in the numbers chosen for fake DH key exchanges, and many
other channels.

*** Acoustic Exfiltration

Devices can transmit data to other devices, including beacons, using
ultrasonic data.  This can be used to correlate separate devices owned
by a user, for example to associate a desktop PC with a smartphone, or
to find out which users are in range of a television.

* Hypothetical Examples

** Inciting Anti-LGBT Violence Via Mass-Personalization

#+ATTR_REVEAL: :frag (fade-in fade-in) :frag_idx (1 2)
  - Create Engagement Funnels To Propaganda Content
  - Leverage Side-Channels To A/B Test Content

** Using Injective Exploitation To Crack Down on Dissidents

#+ATTR_REVEAL: :frag (fade-in fade-in fade-in fade-in fade-in) :frag_idx (1 2 3 4 5)
  - Create an Engagement Funnel
  - Use Targeted Advertising To Inject Fingerprints
  - Leverage Social Media To Identify Nodes In Proximity To Hot/Fingerprinted Nodes
  - Refine Identification With Location Targeting and Beaconing
  - Target Individuals Who Are Likely Dissidents

** Gathering Compromising Intelligence On Public Figures via Data Exfiltration

#+ATTR_REVEAL: :frag (fade-in fade-in fade-in fade-in fade-in) :frag_idx (1 2 3 4 5)
  - Leverage Social Engineering To Create Targeted Ads
  - Inject Fingerprints To Track User
  - Leverage Media Dragnetting to Identify Sites and Locations
  - Use Site Scraping and Semantic Analysis To Tag Content
  - Identify and Exfiltrate Data From Compromising Sites

* How can we mitigate the damage of the current system?

** Don't Sell Ads

** Limit Recommendation and Promotion Systems

** Data Science Red-Teams

* Questions?
